---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/exam-reviews/subject/bio-11/2-3-meiosis/","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

2026-03-04 23:32

Status: #new

Tags: #biology #genetics

# 2.3 Meiosis
#### Cell Types
- Somatic Cells - non-reproductive cells
- Germ Cells - Reproductive Cells

Cells are divided into primarily two types:
- Male Gamete Sperm
- Female Gamete Ovum

Gamete Production
- Many organisms contain pairs of chromosomes. A complete set originates from each parent. Such organisms are known as diploid.
- Pairs of Chromosomes are identical to each other through their bands and shape
	- They are paired together when they share the same layout of genes along the DNA. Such chromosomes are known as **homologous** chromosomes.
		- Also known as homologous pairs
#### Meiosis Definition
- The process of gamete production. The goal is to create haploid gametes. A gamete (1n) will create a single set of chromosomes for their respective organism type

Goals of Meiosis:
- Generate Haploid Gametes
- Genetic Recombination (Creating genetically unique 1n gamete cells)
#### Meiosis Interphase
- Before Meiosis begins, the cells which will undergo gametogenesis are in Interphase
- Gametogenesis - the creation process of gametes (Genesis)
- Right before Meiosis, cells have 2 sets of chromosomes, hence they are 2n. 
- Comparison with Mitosis:
- 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">

<div class="markdown-embed-title">

# 300

</div>



==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Mitosis 
Meiosis 
v. 
2n 
2(2n) 
2n 
2n 
2n 
2(n) 
n 
2(2n) 
n 
2(n) 
n 
n 


</div></div>

## Meiosis
### Meiosis I
- First stage of Meiosis (creates the genetic diversity), also many steps of Mitosis apply here
#### Prophase I
-  What happens in mitosis also occurs here
- The key difference is that
	- Duplicated homologous chromosomes line up in a process called **synapsis**. This is where the process of **crossing** over occurs.
	- A bivalent **Tetrad** is formed through synapsis
	 - A neighbouring non-sister chromatid of the same homologous pair may form a **Chiasma**
		 - This is a x-shaped structure on the Tetrad
	- After crossing over, all FOUR chromatids are genetically unique, despite remaining in their homologous pair.
#### Metaphase I
- Tetrads line up along the metaphase plate (instead of replicated chromosomes)
- This is made possible by the meiotic spindle microtubules pushing and pulling
- A key difference to mitosis
	- 23 Tetrads vs 46 Replicated Chromosomes
	- Meiotic Checkpoints are less strict. They prioritize ensuring pairs (Tetrads) of Homologous chromosomes exist. 
	- Meanwhile, Mitotic Checkpoints (like the M checkpoint) focus on near perfect alignment, which could lead to prolonged arrest. This means that their checkpoints prevent the kind of random orientation of homologous pairs (Tetrads) which are needed in Meiosis
#### Anaphase I
- Spindle Fibres retract to pull the homologous chromosomes towards opposite poles as the bond between the pair of homologous chromosomes in the Tetrad is broken.
	- This is a result of seperase breaking down the **cohesin** proteins
- Genetic content between the two resulting cells will be dramatically different
	- A tetrad may be identical in extreme edge cases, but given there is likely more than one tetrad, a perfectly identical clone is for all intents and purposes impossible.
- Difference with mitosis:
	- While they do pull apart genetic material, the genetic material is different for each cell. In addition, the centromere cohesin proteins are not targeted by the enzyme seperase.
- This is also the point where the diploid cell becomes a haploid gamete, as the ploidy is reduce by 1. This is because we are splitting the tetrads, leading to non-identical sister chromatid pairs. This is because unlike mitosis, we separate our homologous pairs, leading to single sets of chromosomes (say no 1-1 arrangement but a 2(1) arrangement)
#### Telophase I
- Spindle Fibres are retracted
- Cleavage furrow is developed (or cell plate for plants) to divide the cytoplasm
- A nuclear membrane *MAY* reappear
- Condensed chromosomes *MAY* begin to decondense into chromatin
- Cytokinesis then occurs, but one KEY difference:
	- We have distinct parent pairs/homologous chromosomes for each cell. What this means is that we have individual sister chromatids/ replicated chromosomes, instead of a half/half split that decondense into chromatin upon the breaking of the cohesin structures found in Mitosis
### Meiosis II
- Right after Meiosis I and identical to Mitosis
#### Prophase II
- Meiotic spindle microtubules are formed and centrioles move to the opposite ends of the cell
- In some cases:
	- The nuclear membraned may disappear and chromosomes condense (if during Telophase the nuclear membrane and decondensing happened)
- In animal cells, we can see the formation of centrosomes and asters along with the return of 
	- Kinetochore microtubules, Polar microtubules and Astral microtubules
#### Metaphase II
- Looks and feels like mitosis
- Astral microtubules attach to the cell membrane
- Individual replicated chromosomes (sister chromatids) line up on the metaphase plate
	- Key differences:
		- Haploid Metaphase Line up, instead of Diploid Metaphase Line up found in Metaphase I
- If applicable
	- Aster microtubules will attach to the cell membrane
- There is potential for further variety upon separation,
	-  Because sister chromatids aren't identical, this means that there is no strong mitosis like M-check. Because of this, we can have strong random orientations.
#### Anaphase II
- Meiotic Spindle Microtubules retract after the centromeres cohesin is cleaved by the protein seperase. If applicable, it is the kinetochore mictrotubules that pull on these centromeres, acting on motor proteins
- As the split sister chromatids approach the poles, the Meiotic Spindle Microtubules begin to disassemble. In addition, the cell begins to elongate during this process.
- Comparison to Anaphase 1:
	- Anaphase 1 - Splits Homologous Chromosomes and reduces Ploidy (the # of complete sets of a chromosome) by 1 (2n - n). 
	- Anaphase 2 - Splits non-identical sister chromatids into 2, creating two distinct 1n cells.
	- Mitotic Anaphase - In this stage, it splits identical sister chromatids, which keeps the ploidy at 2
#### Telophase II
- Meiotic Spindle Microtubules (if applicable, kinetochore microtubules) are retracted
	- Nuclear membrane begins to reform around genetic material
	- Cleavage furrow forms
	- The chromosomes decondense into chromatin
#### Cytokinesis I and II (applicable to all)
- Cleavage furrow at metaphase plate forms
	- If applicable - Caused by actin microfilaments that pull the cell inwards
	- Eventually pinches the cell in two
- Cytokinesis is a physical manifestation of a process, not a categorizable description
#### Gamete Formation
- While Meiosis divides genetic material, additional cellular development is required for true gametes to form.

- Mendel's law of Separation
	- During gamete formation, the allele for each gene segregate from each other such that each gamete carries only allele for each gene.

- Ova/Ovum Formation
	- The cytoplasm is not evenly split in meiosis (I) and (II). This results in a larger cell and smaller cell.
	- Smaller cell is known as a **polar** bodies
		- They are reabsorbed into the body (they die)
	- The survivor is known as the egg/ova. 
	- They are a lot larger than sperm as they need lot of material to split upon fertilization.
- Spermatogenesis
	- Meiosis results in 4 sperm
- Sperm are mature when
	- Most of the cytoplasm inside the sperm is lost and the nucleus becomes the head (to squirm into a egg)
	-  A flagellum is developed
- Ova mature when
	- A single cell collects more cytoplasm than the other polar bodies during meiosis (aka killing everyone else)
	- They fertilize to create a blastocyst (early fertilized cell)



# References
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/2.1 DNA\|2.1 DNA]]
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/2.2 Mitosis\|2.2 Mitosis]]
