---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/exam-reviews/subject/bio-11/2-8-genetic-mutations/","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

2026-03-28 21:22

Status: #new

Tags: #biology #genetics

# Genetic Mutations
- There are 2 types of Genetic Mutation
	- Errors in Meiosis
	- Change in Chromosome Structure
#### Errors in Meiosis
- Improper distribution during cell division
- When the process of genetic division occurs improperly, it is appropriately named, "non-disjunction".
	- Ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Non-Disjunction Example Meiosis 1 
Non-Disjunction Example Meiosis 2 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 


</div></div>

#### Types of Meiosis Errors
###### Trisomy and Monosomy
- Trisomy occurs when three copies of an chromosome is found in an offspring
- Monosomy may also occur when there is only a single copy of a chromosome
- These individuals are usually **sterile** as their sexual gamete production is not normal
	- It is more likely for children who have older parents at the time of sexual reproduction to inherit these errors
###### Condition Chart
- ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Condition Chart 
Condition 
Live Birth 
Statistic 
Syndrome 
Autosome 
Sex Chromasome 
trisomy 21 
trisomy 18 
trisomy 13 
XXY 
XYY 
XXX 
1 in 800 
1 in 18000 
1 in 15000 
Down 
Edward 
Patau 
Klinefelter 
Jacobs 
Triple X 
1 in 1000 M 
1 in 1000 M 
1 in 1500 F 


</div></div>

###### Down Syndrome (trisomy 21)
- Intellectual Challenges
- Shorter Stature
- Almond Shaped eyes
- Flattened Facial Features
- Abnormal palm creasing patterns
###### Edward Syndrome (trisomy 18)
- Intellectual and Physical Challenges
- Prominent Facial Features
- Extreme Muscle tone
- Shortened life span
###### Patau Syndrome (trisomy 13)
- Intellectual and physical challenges
- Variety of organ defects
- Large triangular nose
- Shortened Life Span
###### Klinefelter Syndrome (XXY)
- Sexual Immaturity
- Brest Swelling
###### Jacobs Syndrome (XYY)
- No unusual syndromes
- Some individuals may be taller than average
###### Triple X Syndrome (XXX)
- Do not exhibit or only exhibit mild symptoms
- Tall and thin
- Wide-set eyes
- Menstrual Irregularity
###### Turner Syndrome (XO)
- Only one X-chromosome
- Short Stature
- Webbed neck
- Sexually Underdeveloped
	- Also Monosomic, so likely sterile
#### Changes in Chromosomes
- 4 types
	- Deletion
		- Genetic Material is lost during crossing over
		- ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Deletion 
Breaks in 
Chromasome 
Deleted Genetic
Material 


</div></div>

	- Duplication
		- Genetic Material is repeated
		- ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Duplication 


</div></div>

	- Inversion
		- Genetic Material is flipped from its normal position.
		- ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Inversion 


</div></div>

	- Translocation
		- Genetic Material is exchanged between two different chromosomes
		- ie. 
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">




==⚠  Switch to EXCALIDRAW VIEW in the MORE OPTIONS menu of this document. ⚠== You can decompress Drawing data with the command palette: 'Decompress current Excalidraw file'. For more info check in plugin settings under 'Saving'


# Excalidraw Data

## Text Elements
Translocation 
Balanced Translocation 


</div></div>



# References
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/2.0x Genetics\|2.0x Genetics]]
[[EXAM REVIEWS/SUBJECT/Bio 11/2.3 Meiosis\|2.3 Meiosis]]
